build infrastructure blog post (#205)
mixxxdj/website: content/news/XXXX-XX-XX-build-infrastructure-updates.md

title: "Improving the Mixxx developer experience with maintainable build infrastructure"
authors: Be.
tags: 2.3, builds, infrastructure
status: draft

> Since we [published Mixxx 2.3 beta in June 2020](/news/2020-06-07-mixxx-2-3-beta-released/), you may have been wondering what has taken so long to get the 2.3.0 release out. Well, we have been very busy the past few months building a more sustainable technical infrastructure for the Mixxx project. We have [moved this website to the Pelican static site generator](/news/2020-12-15-website-improvents/) and moved the [forums](https://mixxx.discourse.group/) to [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/). Additionally, we had to do a ton of work for the macOS and Windows builds. "Building" software is the process of transforming the code that we write into 0s and 1s that tell your computer what to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we [published Mixxx 2.3 beta in June 2020]({filename}/news/2020-06-07-mixxx-2-3-beta-released.md), you may have been wondering what has taken so long to get the 2.3.0 release out. Well, we have been very busy the past few months building a more sustainable technical infrastructure for the Mixxx project. We have [moved this website to the Pelican static site generator]({filename}/news/2020-12-15-website-improvents.md) and moved the [forums](https://mixxx.discourse.group/) to [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/). Additionally, we had to do a ton of work for the macOS and Windows builds. "Building" software is the process of transforming the code that we write into 0s and 1s that tell your computer what to do.
```

... And everywhere else. That way pelican is able to check the validity of links during build.

title: "Improving the Mixxx developer experience with maintainable build infrastructure"
authors: Be.
tags: 2.3, builds, infrastructure
status: draft

> Since we [published Mixxx 2.3 beta in June 2020]({filename}/news/2020-06-07-mixxx-2-3-beta-released.md), you may have been wondering what has taken so long to get the 2.3.0 release out. Well, we have been very busy the past few months building a more sustainable technical infrastructure for the Mixxx project. We have [moved this website to the Pelican static site generator]({filename}/news/2020-12-15-website-improvents.md) and moved the [forums](https://mixxx.discourse.group/) to [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/). Additionally, we had to do a ton of work for the macOS and Windows builds. "Building" software is the process of transforming the code that we write into 0s and 1s that tell your computer what to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we [published Mixxx 2.3 beta in June 2020]({filename}/news/2020-06-07-mixxx-2-3-beta-released.md), you may have been wondering what has taken so long to get the 2.3.0 release out. Well, we have been very busy the past few months building a more sustainable technical infrastructure for the Mixxx project. We have [moved this website to the Pelican static site generator]({filename}/news/2020-12-15-website-improvents.md) and moved the [forums](https://mixxx.discourse.group/) to [Discourse](https://www.discourse.org/). Additionally, we had to do a ton of work for the macOS and Windows builds. "Building" software is the process of transforming the code that we write into an executable file that you can run on your computer.
```

> ## Build servers

Reviewer: I think headlines should use title case:

```suggestion
## Build Servers
```
...and below.

A great aspect of using GitHub Actions for our builds is that GitHub does the work of keeping the operating systems and build tools in the virtual machine images up to date for us. However, when we tried to build Mixxx with our old archive of dependencies on GitHub Actions, it would not build because GitHub Actions no longer had a version of XCode old enough to support the macOS 10.13 SDK which was used on our old macOS build server.

So, we got GitHub Actions to run the scripts we used on the old build server to build all of Mixxx's dependencies. This took another about another week of work. With a new archive of dependencies built by GitHub Actions, we could build Mixxx on GitHub Actions. Then, more complications became apparent.

> The builds from GitHub Actions were so laggy that they were completely unusable, but the builds from the old build server with the same code were okay. It turned out that having our own build server that was such a hassle to upgrade that we didn't do it for years was masking a serious bug. Building Mixxx with a macOS SDK 10.14 or newer made Qt use layer backing. Combined with the legacy QGLWidget API we still use for Mixxx's waveforms, this was extremely slow. We have [previously attempted](https://github.com/mixxxdj/mixxx/pull/1974) to update to the newer QOpenGLWidget API. Although this performed much better on macOS, the waveforms jerked back and forth instead of scrolling smoothly. We considered trying to finish this work for 2.3, but the task is difficult and would require major changes to the waveform rendering code. Ultimately solving this performance issue will require [rewriting our whole GUI for Qt6](https://forum.qt.io/topic/121746/determing-graphics-frame-swap-time-when-rendering-in-qt-6/) which will also be a huge challenge. If anyone reading this is skilled at graphics programming, please get in touch on our [Zulip chat](https://mixxx.zulipchat.com/). We could really use help figuring out how to rewrite waveform rendering for Qt6. For now, we are using an ugly hack of automatically downloading the macOS 10.13 SDK to build Mixxx with current versions of XCode that do not officially support that old of a macOS SDK.

Reviewer: Can you add a link that explains what layer backing is?

Btw, it's much easier to comment on individual sentences than whole paragraphs. For future PRs I recommend putting each sentence into a separate line (this also makes the diffs nicer). The final website post will look the same.

Author: If I had a link that explained wtf layer backing is, maybe we wouldn't be in this mess.

Author: > Btw, it's much easier to comment on individual sentences than whole paragraphs. For future PRs I recommend putting each sentence into a separate line (this also makes the diffs nicer). The final website post will look the same.

It is more cumbersome to write prose that way though.

Reviewer: I usually write the whole paragraph in one line  and then do `s/. /.\n/g` afterwards :D

Using vcpkg has allowed us to build Mixxx with some dependencies that were missing on Windows before because nobody wanted to put in the effort to write Windows batch scripts to build them. Now, Mixxx can play module tracker files with [libmodplug](https://github.com/Konstanty/libmodplug) and use LV2 effects plugins on Windows. Coincidentally, as we were working on this, falkTX at DISTRHO published the first release of [PawPaw](https://kx.studio/News/?action=view&url=announcing-pawpaw-cross-platform-lv2-ports-for-macos-and-windows) bringing many LV2 plugins common on Linux to Windows and macOS, which can now be used with Mixxx!

> ![screenshot showing Mixxx with LV2 plugins, module tracker support, and KeyFinder support]({static}/images/news/lv2-modplug-keyfinder-windows.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Screenshot showing Mixxx with LV2 plugins, module tracker support, and KeyFinder support]({static}/images/news/lv2-modplug-keyfinder-windows.png)
```

## Developer Experience

All of this work has been very tedious. We would have much rather spent this effort writing fun new features for Mixxx, but this had to be done to keep the project going. Now that it is working, developing for Mixxx is much nicer.

> As we got the new setup going with GitHub Actions, we wrote scripts that can be used both by GitHub Actions and by developers to set up a development environment very easily. The scripts automatically download the archive of Mixxx's dependencies. On macOS, the script sets the appropriate environment variables. On Windows, the script generates a `CMakeSettings.json` file which can be used to setup Visual Studio to work on Mixxx very easily. We hope this makes Mixxx more welcoming for Windows and macOS developers to contribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we got the new setup going with GitHub Actions, we wrote scripts that can be used both by GitHub Actions and by developers that want to set up a development environment on their local computer. The scripts automatically download the archive of Mixxx's dependencies. On macOS, the script sets the appropriate environment variables. On Windows, the script generates a `CMakeSettings.json` file which can be used to setup Visual Studio to work on Mixxx very easily. We hope this makes Mixxx more welcoming for Windows and macOS developers to contribute.
```

## Developer Experience

All of this work has been very tedious. We would have much rather spent this effort writing fun new features for Mixxx, but this had to be done to keep the project going. Now that it is working, developing for Mixxx is much nicer.

> As we got the new setup going with GitHub Actions, we wrote scripts that can be used both by GitHub Actions and by developers that want to set up a development environment on their computer. The scripts automatically download the archive of Mixxx's dependencies. On macOS, the script sets the appropriate environment variables. On Windows, the script generates a `CMakeSettings.json` file which can be used to setup Visual Studio to work on Mixxx very easily. We hope this makes Mixxx more welcoming for Windows and macOS developers to contribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we got the new setup going with GitHub Actions, we wrote scripts that can be used both by GitHub Actions and by developers that want to set up a development environment on their computer. The scripts automatically download the archive of Mixxx's dependencies. On macOS, the script sets the appropriate environment variables. On Windows, the script generates a [`CMakeSettings.json` file](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/cmakesettings-reference) which can be used to setup Visual Studio to work on Mixxx very easily. We hope this makes Mixxx more welcoming for Windows and macOS developers to contribute.
```

Developers on every OS can now easily have their code built and tested automatically on Windows, macOS, and Linux simply by pushing commits to GitHub, and we can ask users to give feedback using the build artifacts from GitHub Actions.

On macOS and Linux, the builds on GitHub Actions only take a few minutes now that we are using [ccache](https://ccache.dev/) which was [easy to implement with CMake](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/prop_tgt/RULE_LAUNCH_COMPILE.html). We have tried getting compiler caching working on Windows with [sccache](https://github.com/mixxxdj/mixxx/pull/3618) and [clcache](https://github.com/mixxxdj/mixxx/pull/3473) but have not succeeded yet, so the Windows builds still take about 40 minutes.

Historically, issues with the build servers have been a major factor why Mixxx releases have been so few and far between. We hope that by having this automated on a reliable service that we do not need to maintain ourselves, we can focus more on programming cool new features and getting Mixxx releases published more regularly.

> If you want to [get involved](https://mixxx.org/get-involved/) in making Mixxx more awesome, come introduce yourself on our [Zulip chat](https://mixxx.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/109123-introduce-yourself). This new infrastructure makes it easier both for developers to contribute code and for users to test new code, so you do not need to be a coder to contribute!

Reviewer: The second half of the sentence does not follow from the first half, which makes it sound weird. 

```suggestion
If you want to [get involved](https://mixxx.org/get-involved/) in making Mixxx more awesome, come introduce yourself on our [Zulip chat](https://mixxx.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/109123-introduce-yourself). You do not need to be a coder to contribute - our new infrastructure makes contributing easier both for developers and testers!
```
